Protein dna docking tutorial with haddock3 (#681)
haddocking/haddocking.github.io: education/HADDOCK3/HADDOCK3-protein-DNA-basic/index.md

Reviewer: Require an update of the surfdrive content, replacing `precomputed` directory with the newly computed models with `numc2sym = 1`.
I would not change the config files as this parameter is about to disappear (at least users will no more need to specify it by hand, see [https://github.com/haddocking/haddock3/pull/975](https://github.com/haddocking/haddock3/pull/975))

---
layout: page
title: "Basic protein-DNA docking using local version of Haddock3"
excerpt: "A basic tutorial on protein-DNA docking in Haddock3."

> tags: [HADDOCK, Haddock3, Pymol, Protein-DNA]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: [HADDOCK, Haddock3, PyMOL, Protein-DNA, symmetry, 3-body docking]
```

image:
 feature: pages/banner_education-thin.jpg
---
This tutorial consists of the following sections:

* table of contents
{:toc}

<hr>

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: Rendering is better when an empty line is present after a section title.
```suggestion
## Introduction

```

> ## Introduction
> This tutorial demonstrates a simplified Haddock3 workflow dedicated to predicting the 3D structure of protein-DNA (double-stranded DNA) complexes using pre-defined restraints, derived from the literature, and symmetry restraints. Here, we introduce the basic concepts of HADDOCK, suitable for tackling various typical protein-DNA docking challenges: 

Reviewer: Rendering is better when an empty line is present after a section title.
```suggestion
## Introduction

This tutorial demonstrates a simplified Haddock3 workflow dedicated to predicting the 3D structure of protein-DNA (double-stranded DNA) complexes using pre-defined restraints, derived from the literature, and symmetry restraints. Here, we introduce the basic concepts of HADDOCK, suitable for tackling various typical protein-DNA docking challenges: 
```

* basic preparation of the input PDB files; 
* creation of the suitable Haddock3 workflow; 
* basic analysis of the docking results. 

Please note that we do not cover the processing of literature data into docking restraints; for more information, please refer to the [advanced tutorial](https://www.bonvinlab.org/education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-DNA-advanced/). 

Computation within this tutorial should take 1.5 hours on 8 CPUs. The tutorial data, as well as precomputed results available [here](https://surfdrive.surf.nl/files/index.php/s/5Z1C9UWKgwTpq74).  

> This tutorail is an adaptation of the basic protein-DNA docking [tutorial](https://www.bonvinlab.org/education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-DNA-basic/) using HADDOCK2.4 webserver. 

Reviewer: I would remove this, as it do not add a lot of information in my optinion
```suggestion
```

> ### Tutorial test case

Reviewer: Rendering is better when an empty line is present after a section title.
```suggestion
### Tutorial test case

```

In this tutorial, we will work with the phage 434 Cro/OR1 complex (PDB: [3CRO](https://www.rcsb.org/structure/3CRO)), formed by bacteriophage 434 Cro repressor proteins and the OR1 operator.

Cro is part of the bacteriophage 434 genetic switch, playing a key role in controlling the switch between the lysogenic and lytic cycles of the bacteriophage. It is a *repressor* protein that works in opposition to the phage's repressor cI protein to control the genetic switch. Both repressors compete to gain control over an operator region containing three operators that determine the state of the lytic/lysogenic genetic switch. If Cro prevails, the late genes of the phage will be expressed, resulting in lysis. Conversely, if the cI repressor prevails, the transcription of Cro genes is blocked, and cI repressor synthesis is maintained, resulting in a state of lysogeny.

> ### Solved structure of the Cro-OR1 complex

Reviewer: Rendering is better when an empty line is present after a section title.
```suggestion
### Solved structure of the Cro-OR1 complex

```

> The structure of the phage 434 Cro/OR1 complex was solved by X-RAY crystallography at 2.5Å. We will use this experimentally solved structure as a reference within the tutorial. Cro is a symmetrical dimer, each subunit contains a helix-turn-helix (HTH), with helices α2 and α3 being separated by a short turn. This is a DNA binding motif that is known to bind major grooves. Helix α3 is the recognition helix that fits into the major groove of the operator DNA and is oriented with its axes parallel to the major groove. The side chains of each helix are thus positioned to interact with the edges of base pairs on the floor of the groove. Non-specific interactions also help to anchor Cro to the DNA. These include H-bonds between main chain NH groups and phosphate oxygens of the DNA in the region of the operator. Cro distorts the normal B-form DNA conformation: the OR1 DNA is bent (curved) by Cro, and the middle region of the operator is overwound, as reflected in the reduced distance between phosphate backbones in the minor groove.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The structure of the phage 434 Cro/OR1 complex was solved by X-RAY crystallography at 2.5Å.
We will use this experimentally solved structure (PDBID: 3CRO) as a reference within the tutorial.
Cro is a symmetrical dimer, each subunit contains a helix-turn-helix (HTH), with helices α2 and α3 being separated by a short turn.
This is a DNA binding motif that is known to bind major grooves.
Helix α3 is the recognition helix that fits into the major groove of the operator DNA and is oriented with its axes parallel to the major groove.
The side chains of each helix are thus positioned to interact with the edges of base pairs on the floor of the groove. Non-specific interactions also help to anchor Cro to the DNA.
These include H-bonds between main chain NH groups and phosphate oxygens of the DNA in the region of the operator.
Cro distorts the normal B-form DNA conformation: the OR1 DNA is bent (curved) by Cro, and the middle region of the operator is overwound, as reflected in the reduced distance between phosphate backbones in the minor groove.
```

Author: Why start each sentence from a new line?

Reviewer: Non-rendered display purpose.
Also easier to point a specific line.

Author: Ok!

<img src="/education/HADDOCK3/HADDOCK3-protein-dna-basic/CRO-OR1.png">
</figure>

Throughout the tutorial, coloured text will be used to refer to questions, instructions, PyMOL and terminal prompts:

<a class="prompt prompt-question">This is a question prompt: try to answer it!</a>
<a class="prompt prompt-info">This is an instruction prompt: follow it!</a>
<a class="prompt prompt-pymol">This is a PyMOL prompt: write this in the PyMOL command line prompt!<a>
<a class="prompt prompt-cmd">This is a Linux prompt: insert the commands in the terminal!</a>

It is always possible that you have questions or run into problems for which you cannot find the answer. Here are some additional links that can help you to find the answers and solutions:

* Haddock3 Documentation: [https://www.bonvinlab.org/haddock3/](https://www.bonvinlab.org/haddock3/)
* Bioexcel User Forum: [https://ask.bioexcel.eu/c/haddock/6](https://ask.bioexcel.eu/c/haddock/6)
* Haddock3 Github (issues & discussions): [https://github.com/haddocking/haddock3/](https://github.com/haddocking/haddock3/)
* HADDOCK Help Center: [https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/help](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/help)

<hr>

> ## Software and data setup

Reviewer: Rendering is better when an empty line is present after a section title.
```suggestion
## Software and data setup

```

> For a complete setup of the local Haddock3 version refer to [Haddock3 Documentation](https://www.bonvinlab.org/haddock3/). Please, familiarise yourself with the sections ['**A brief introduction to HADDOCK3**'](https://www.bonvinlab.org/haddock3/intro.html) and ['**Installation**'](https://www.bonvinlab.org/haddock3/INSTALL.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a complete setup of the local version of Haddock3, refer to the [online documentation](https://www.bonvinlab.org/haddock3/).
Please, familiarise yourself with the sections ['**A brief introduction to HADDOCK3**'](https://www.bonvinlab.org/haddock3/intro.html) and ['**Installation**'](https://www.bonvinlab.org/haddock3/INSTALL.html).
```

> In this tutorial we will use the PyMOL molecular visualisation system. If not already installed, download and install PyMOL from [here](https://pymol.org/). You can use your favourite visualisation software instead, but be aware that instructions here are provided only for PyMOL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we will use the PyMOL molecular visualisation system. If not already installed, download and install PyMOL from [here](https://pymol.org/). You can use your favourite visualisation software instead, but be aware that instructions for this tutorial are provided only for PyMOL.
```

Author: then better “in this tutorial”?

Reviewer: indeed

* `pdbs`:
    * `1ZUG_ensemble.pdb`, an NMR ensemble (10 structures) of the 343 Cro repressor structures;
    * `1ZUG_dimer1.pdb`, a single structure coming from the NMR ensemble (`1ZUG_ensemble.pdb`) with the terminal disordered residues removed;
    * `1ZUG_dimer2.pdb`, a single structure coming from the NMR ensemble (`1ZUG_ensemble.pdb`) with the terminal disordered residues removed. Differ from `1ZUG_dimer1.pdb` only by chain ID;
    * `OR1_unbound.pdb`, a structure of the OR1 operator in B-DNA conformation;
    * `3CRO_complex.pdb`, an X-RAY structure of the sought-for complex, to be used to evaluate the docking poses.
* `restraints`:
    * `ambig_prot_dna.tbl`, a file containing the ambiguous restraints for this docking scenario.
* `saved-run`, a folder with Haddock3 output, produced by the `protein-dna-basic.cfg` workflow. We will navigate relevant parts of this folder throughout the tutorial.

<hr>

## Understanding the Ambiguous Interaction Restraints

The Ambiguous Interaction Restraints (AIRs) are crucial to successful docking as AIRs should guide docking partners towards the correct conformation. AIRs consist of the residues located in the interface of a complex.

> ### Visualisation of the interface

Reviewer: Rendering is better when an empty line is present after a section title.
```suggestion
### Visualisation of the interface

```

 <figure style="text-align: center;">
   <img width="50%" src="/education/HADDOCK3/HADDOCK3-protein-DNA-basic/CRO-interface.png">
 </figure>
 <br>
</details>
<br>
<a class="prompt prompt-question">
Can you tell why the residue 33 is excluded from the interface amino acids?
</a>
<details style="background-color:#DAE4E7">
 <summary style="bold">
   <i>Answer</i> <i class="material-icons">expand_more</i>
 </summary>
 <p>
   The residue 33 is not solvent accessible, thus it does not belong to the interface. You can visualise it by colouring residue 33 in blue, and switching between to the cartoon and surface representations (sele resi 33; color blue, sele; show cartoon; show surface)
 </p>
</details>
<br>
<a class="prompt prompt-info">
Repeat the same analysis with the DNA molecule OR1_unbound.pdb using the residues (13+14+15+16+17+18+22+23+24+25) or (4+5+6+7+31+32+33+34+35+36) as an interface.
</a>

_**Note**_ that in the real docking case the bound structure of a complex is unavailable. In this case, the interface residues could be located using experimental data, knowledge from the literature, using computational predictions, etc.

### What’s inside of the restraints file?

> The ambiguous interaction restraints are defined in the `ambig_prot_dna.tbl` file. This file was created using both experimental knowledge and information from literature. A detailed explanation of how to generate these restraints can be found in the advanced version of the tutorial, [here](https://www.bonvinlab.org/education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-DNA-advanced/#available-data). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ambiguous interaction restraints are defined in the `ambig_prot_dna.tbl` file.
This file was created using both experimental knowledge and information from literature.
A detailed explanation of how to generate these restraints can be found in the advanced version of the tutorial, accessible [here](https://www.bonvinlab.org/education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-DNA-advanced/#available-data). 
```

Author: Again, why? I did check the visuals with localhost. It all looks coherent.

> Let’s have a look at it's first lines:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Let’s have a look at it's first lines:
```

```bash
assign ( resid 35 and segid C)
(
( resid 32 and segid B and (name H3 or name O4 or name C4 or name C5 or name C6 or name C7))
or
( resid 33 and segid B and (name H3 or name O4 or name C4 or name C5 or name C6 or name C7))
) 2.000 2.000 0.000
```
The first line means that the residue 35 from the chain C (protein) should interact either with the residue 32, or with the residue 33 of the chain B (DNA). Additionally, the substring `(name H3 or name O4 or name C4 or name C5 or name C6 or name C7)` precise the atoms with which the interaction should occur.

In other words, if at least one pair or residues (residue 35 from chain C; residue 32 from chain B) or (residue 35 from chain C; residue 33 from chain B) are located within 2Å from one another - then this particular restraint is satisfied.

<a class="prompt prompt-question">
Check out the list of atoms defined in 'ambig_prot_DNA.tbl'. Which part of the DNA is targeted by defining a given set of atoms? What is the effect of such restraints onto the docking process? 
</a>

You may notice that not all residues of the protein’s interface are used for the AIRs. This is done to save computational time.

> HADDOCK is not limited to ambiguous restraints, other types, like unambiguous and symmetry restraints can play an important role as well. As mentioned before, Cro is known to function as a symmetrical dimer. This means we should **enforce a pairwise symmetry (C2)** between the two protein monomers. This part will be explained in the “Haddock3 workflow” section of the tutorial.

Reviewer: Adding internal link
```suggestion
HADDOCK is not limited to ambiguous restraints, other types, like unambiguous and symmetry restraints can play an important role as well. As mentioned before, Cro is known to function as a symmetrical dimer. This means we should **enforce a pairwise symmetry (C2)** between the two protein monomers. This part will be explained in the [Haddock3 workflow](#haddock3-workflow) section of the tutorial.
```

<hr>

## Preparation of PDB files for the docking (optional)

> Haddock3 requires an input structure for each docking partner. The quality of these input structures are highly influential to the quality of the docking models. Conformational deficiencies such as clashes, chain breaks and missing atoms may cause problems during the docking, so it is important to verify each input file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Haddock3 requires an input structure for each docking partner. The quality of these input structures will highly influence to the quality of the generated docking models. Conformational deficiencies such as sterical clashes, chain breaks and missing atoms may cause problems during the docking, so it is important to verify each input file.
```

Another important factor is the difference between unbound and bound conformations. The more different these conformations are, the more difficult it is to generate correct docking models.

> In this section we will go over the preparation of the protein structures. The preparation of the DNA structure is out of the score of this tutorial and detailed [here](https://www.bonvinlab.org/education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-DNA-advanced/#preparing-pdb-coordinate-files-for-the-or1-operator).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section we will go over the preparation of the protein structures. The preparation of the DNA structure is out of the scope of this tutorial, but is detailed in the [advanced tutorial](https://www.bonvinlab.org/education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-DNA-advanced/#preparing-pdb-coordinate-files-for-the-or1-operator).
```

Ready-to-dock structures are available in `pdbs` directory, namely `1ZUG_dimer1.pdb`, `1ZUG_dimer2.pdb` and `OR1_unbound.pdb`.

### Protein structures

> An unbound structure of the protein is available on [PDB](https://www.rcsb.org/structure/1ZUG). We already examined this structure using PyMOL. Our observation revealed that this protein has a disordered tail, and that this disordered tail does not interact with the DNA. Since the core conformation remains unchanged, we can simply take the first conformation from the ensemble, remove the disordered tail from it and use it as an input structure for the docking. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An unbound structure of the protein is available on [PDB](https://www.rcsb.org/structure/1ZUG). We already examined this structure using PyMOL. Our observation revealed that this protein has a disordered tail, which is not interacting with the DNA. Since the core conformation remains unchanged, we can simply take the first conformation from the ensemble, remove the disordered tail from it and use it as an input structure for the docking. 
```

> This can be done using `pdb-tools`, a collection of simple scripts handy to manipulate pdb files. `pdb-tools` is installed automatically with Haddock3. Alternatively, a web-server is available as a [web-server](https://rascar.science.uu.nl/pdbtools/).

Reviewer: Here we use `wenmr` instead of `rascar`, for branding purposes.
DNS is taking care of pointing to rascar by itself.
```suggestion
This can be done using `pdb-tools`, a collection of simple scripts handy to manipulate pdb files. `pdb-tools` is installed automatically with Haddock3. Alternatively, it is also available as a [web-server](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/pdbtools/).
```

> To obtain a single trimmed structure using command-line version of `pdb-tools` _**remember to activate a virtual environment for Haddock3 first**_. 

Reviewer: This sentence is missing something.
```suggestion
To obtain a single trimmed structure, we will make use of the command-line version of `pdb-tools` _**remember to activate a virtual environment for Haddock3 first**_. 
```

The following command will override existing file with the name `1ZUG_dimer1.pdb` - consider executing it outside of `pdbs/`:
<a class="prompt prompt-cmd">
pdb_fetch 1ZUG | pdb_selmodel -1 | pdb_delhetatm | pdb_selres -1:66 | pdb_tidy -strict > 1ZUG_dimer1.pdb
</a>

> This sequence of commands: 1/ Downloads given structure in PDB format from the RCSB website; 2/ Extracts the first model from the file; 3/ Removes all HETATM records in the PDB file; 4/ Selects residues by their index (in a range); 5/ Adds TER statement at the end of the chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This sequence of commands will:
- `pdb_fetch 1ZUG`: Download PDBID 1ZUG structure in PDB format from the RCSB website.
- `pdb_selmodel -1`: Extract the first model from the file.
- `pdb_delhetatm`: Remove all HETATM records in the PDB file.
- `pdb_selres -1:66`: Select residues 1 to 66, filtering them by their index (in a range).
- `pdb_tidy -strict`: Add TER statement at the end of the chain.
```

The complex of interest contains 2 copies of the protein. As each molecule given to HADDOCK in a docking scenario must have a **unique chain ID and segment ID**, we have to change chain ID from A to C and save this as a new structure (segment ID remains empty for both cases, which is acceptable):
<a class="prompt prompt-cmd">
pdb_rplchain -A:C 1ZUG_dimer1.pdb > 1ZUG_dimer2.pdb
</a>

> _**Note**_ that it is possible to perform the docking with an ensemble of trimmed conformations. Such ensemble can be obtained using the next command: `pdb_fetch 1ZUG | pdb_delhetatm | pdb_selres -1:66 | pdb_tidy -strict > 1zug_ens.pdb`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_**Note**_ that it is possible to perform the docking with an ensemble of trimmed conformations. Such ensemble can be obtained using the following command: `pdb_fetch 1ZUG | pdb_delhetatm | pdb_selres -1:66 | pdb_tidy -strict > 1zug_ens.pdb`. Here the command `pdb_selmodel -1` was removed and therefore all the available models in the ensemble will be processed.
```

<hr>

## Docking with Haddock3

> In this section, we will discuss the specifics of protein-DNA docking in the frame of Haddock3. We will then create an appropriate Haddock3 workflow and, finally, perform an analysis of the docking results using the experimentally solved structure as a reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we will discuss the specifics of protein-DNA docking in the frame of Haddock3. We will then create an appropriate Haddock3 workflow and, finally, perform an analysis of the docking results and evaluate their quality with respect to the experimentally solved structure as a reference.
```

### Specifics of the protein-DNA docking

Docking a double-stranded DNA requires adjusting several default parameters to better mimic the conditions under which DNA interactions occur. The following parameters should be modified:
* Add an automatic restraint to maintain the input conformation of the DNA during refinement: `dnarest_on = true`;
* Perform explicit solvent molecular dynamics refinement instead of energy minimization refinement by using the `[mdref]` module instead of `[emref]`;
* Set the dielectric constant to 78 for both sampling and flexible refinement (but not for MD refinement): `epsilon = 78`;
* Fix the relative dielectric constant in the Coulomb potential (rather than using a distance-dependent mode) for both sampling and flexible refinement: `dielec = cdie`;
* Set the weight of the desolvation energy term to 0: `w_desolv = 0`;
* Lower the scaling factor for flexible refinement to 4 (from 8) to allow less movement during the refinement: `tadfactor = 4`;
* Lower the initial temperature for the final round of flexible refinement to 300 (from 1000) to allow less movement during the final refinement stage: `temp_cool3_init = 300`.

> _**Note**_ that Haddock3 distinguishes DNA nucleotides from RNA nucleotides based on the residue naming in the PDB file. DNA nucleotides are named with two letters starting with 'D' (e.g., 'DA' for adenine in DNA), while RNA nucleotides use single-letter names (e.g., 'A' for adenine in RNA).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_**Note**_ that Haddock3 distinguishes DNA nucleotides from RNA nucleotides based on the residue naming in the PDB file. DNA nucleotides are named with two letters starting with 'D' (e.g., 'DA' for deoxyadenosine in DNA), while RNA nucleosides use single-letter names (e.g., 'A' for adenosine in RNA).
```

### Haddock3 workflow

> Now that we have all the necessary files ready for docking, along with several insights into the specifics of protein-DNA docking, it’s time to create the docking workflow. In this scenario, we will adhere to the following straightforward workflow: rigid-body docking, semi-flexible refinement, and explicit solvent molecular dynamics (MD) refinement followed by clustering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have all the necessary files ready for docking, along with several insights into the specifics of protein-DNA docking, it’s time to create the docking workflow. In this scenario, we will adhere to the following straightforward workflow: rigid-body docking, semi-flexible refinement in torsional angle space, molecular dynamics (MD) refinement in explicit solvent, and a final RMSD clustering step.
```

Out workflow consists of the following modules:
* **topoaa**: _Generates the topologies for the CNS engine and builds missing atoms;_

> * **rigidbody**: _Performs sampling by rigid-body energy minimization (equivalent to it0 in Haddock2.x);_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **rigidbody**: _Performs sampling by rigid-body energy minimization (equivalent to `it0` in Haddock2.X);_
```

* **caprieval**: _Calculates CAPRI metrics (i-RMSD, l-RMSD, Fnat, DockQ) with respect to the best-scored model or a provided reference structure;_
* **seletop**: _Selects X best-scored models from the previous module;_

> * **flexref**: _Performs semi-flexible refinement of the interface (equivalent to it1 in Haddock2.x);_ 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **flexref**: _Performs semi-flexible refinement of the interface (equivalent to `it1` in Haddock2.X);_ 
```

* **caprieval**

> * **mdref**: _Performs final refinement via explicit solvent MD (equivalent to itw in Haddock2.X);_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **mdref**: _Performs final refinement in explicit solvent MD (equivalent to itw in Haddock2.X);_
```

* **caprieval** 
* **rmsdmatrix**: _Calculates of the root mean squared deviation (RMSD) matrix between all models from the previous module;_

> * **clustrmsd**: _Takes the RMSD matrix calculated in the [rmsdmatrix] module and performs a hierarchical clustering procedure on it;_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **clustrmsd**: _Takes the RMSD matrix calculated in the `[rmsdmatrix]` module and performs a hierarchical clustering procedure on it;_
```

> * **caprieval**
> * **seletopclusts**: _Selects X best-scored models of Y clusters._

Reviewer: I would invert the two modules
```suggestion
* **seletopclusts**: _Selects X best-scored models of Y clusters._
* **caprieval**: _Final assessment of the docking results._
```

Author: Indeed! Plus - they are inverted in my TOLM. Nice that you noticed!

> As mentioned before, we should enforce C2 symmetry between the proteins throughout the entire docking process. This can be achieved by adding the following parameters to the `[rigidbody]` , `[flexref]` , and `[mdref]` modules:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned before, we should enforce C2 symmetry between the proteins throughout the entire docking process. This can be easily achieved by adding the following parameters to the `[rigidbody]` , `[flexref]` , and `[mdref]` modules:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```toml
```

# Turn on symmetry restraints 
sym_on = true
# Define first symmetry partner 
c2sym_seg1_1 = 'A'
# Define second symmetry partner 
c2sym_seg2_1 = 'C'
# Specify the range of residues that should be taken from the first partner
c2sym_sta1_1 = 4
c2sym_end1_1 = 64
# Specify the range of residues that should be taken from the second partner
c2sym_sta2_1 = 4
c2sym_end2_1 = 64
```

**Note** that in this definition we omitted the first 3 residues of each protein.

> Take a look at the tolm configuration file `protein-dna-basic.cfg`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take a look at the TOML configuration file `protein-dna-basic.cfg`. 
```

<a class="prompt prompt-info"> Take your time to read the comments and relate parameters of this file to the information given above:</a>

{% highlight toml %}
# ====================================================================
# Protein-DNA basic docking example with:
# 1. Pre-generated ambiguous restraints between protein dimer and DNA partners
# 2. Pairwise (C2) symmetry between the two protein monomers
# 3. Specific to double-stranded DNA-protein docking parameters
# ====================================================================

# directory in which the docking will be performed
run_dir = "run"

# compute mode
mode = "local"
ncores=8

# input PDBs of the docking partners 
molecules =  [
    "pdbs/1ZUG_dimer1.pdb",
    "pdbs/OR1_unbound.pdb",
    "pdbs/1ZUG_dimer2.pdb"
    ]

# ====================================================================
# Workflow is defined as a pipeline of modules with specified parameters per module 
# ====================================================================

[topoaa]

> [rigidbody]

Reviewer: Two parameters to add.
`tolerance`, just to make sure it will go fine
`sampling`: to show that this parameter is used to define the number of rigidbody models to generate
```suggestion
[rigidbody]
tolerance = 5
sampling = 1000
```

# Cro to OR1 ambiguous restraints
ambig_fname = "restraints/ambig_prot_DNA.tbl"
# C2 symmetry
sym_on = true
c2sym_seg1_1 = 'A'
c2sym_seg2_1 = 'C'
c2sym_sta1_1 = 4
c2sym_sta2_1 = 4
c2sym_end1_1 = 64
c2sym_end2_1 = 64
# constant for the electrostatic energy term
epsilon = 78
# fix constant in Coulomb potential
dielec = 'cdie'
# weight of the desolvation energy term 
w_desolv = 0

[caprieval]
reference_fname = "pdbs/3CRO_complex.pdb"

> [seletop]

Reviewer: Here, while default parameters are fine, I would add the `select = 200`, so we can explain it with comments
```suggestion
[seletop]
# Select top 200 models based on HADDOCK score
select = 200
```

[flexref]
# to maintain conformation of the DNA with automatic restraints
dnarest_on = true
# Cro to OR1 ambiguous restraints
ambig_fname = "restraints/ambig_prot_DNA.tbl"
# C2 symmetry
sym_on = true
c2sym_seg1_1 = 'A'
c2sym_seg2_1 = 'C'
c2sym_sta1_1 = 4
c2sym_sta2_1 = 4
c2sym_end1_1 = 64
c2sym_end2_1 = 64
# constant for the electrostatic energy term
epsilon = 78
# fix constant in Coulomb potential
dielec = 'cdie'
# weight of the desolvation energy term 
w_desolv = 0
# allow less movement during the refinement 
tadfactor = 4

> temp_cool3_init = 300

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Reduce the initial temperature for the final round of flexible refinement to 300 (from 1000 with default parameters)
temp_cool3_init = 300
```

[caprieval]
reference_fname = "pdbs/3CRO_complex.pdb"

> [mdref]

Reviewer: Tolerance just to avoid any kind of issue
```suggestion
[mdref]
tolerance = 5
```

# to maintain conformation of the DNA with automatic restraints
dnarest_on = true
# Cro to OR1 ambiguous restraints
ambig_fname = "restraints/ambig_prot_DNA.tbl"
# C2 symmetry
sym_on = true
c2sym_seg1_1 = 'A'
c2sym_seg2_1 = 'C'
c2sym_sta1_1 = 4
c2sym_sta2_1 = 4
c2sym_end1_1 = 64
c2sym_end2_1 = 64
# constant for the electrostatic energy term (default value)
epsilon = 1
w_desolv = 0
# reduce the number of MD steps 
watersteps = 750

[caprieval]
reference_fname = "pdbs/3CRO_complex.pdb"

[rmsdmatrix]

> # use all residues of each docking partner to calculate the RMSD matrix
> resdic_A = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66]
> resdic_B = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40]
> resdic_C = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# By default, all residues will be used to calculate the RMSD matrix
```

[clustrmsd]
# generate an interactive plot of the clustering results

> plot_matrix = true

Reviewer: If I remember well, there is a tuning of the cut-off distance in this tutorial ?
```suggestion
plot_matrix = true
# Increase RMSD cutoff
clust_cutoff = 20
```

[seletopclusts]

[caprieval]
reference_fname = "pdbs/3CRO_complex.pdb"

# ====================================================================

{% endhighlight %}

_**Note**_ that in this example we use relative paths to define input files and output folder. However it is preferable to use the full paths instead. 

> This workflow begins by creating topologies for the docking partners. Rigid body sampling is performed with ambiguous and symmetry restraints, generating 1000 models, from which the top 200 are selected. These models then undergo flexible refinement followed by MD refinement in explicit solvent, still maintaining the same ambiguous and symmetry restraints. Finally, docking models are clustered via RMSD, with all residues used to calculate RMSD values. The top 5 models from each cluster are selected. The `caprieval` module is added after each step to simplify model analysis and track the rank of models throughout the docking process.

Reviewer: Here, there is an issue:
default parameter in `[seletopclusts]` is `top_models = 10`.
So either the text must be modified, or the parameter tuned in the module.
You choose
```suggestion
This workflow begins by creating topologies for the docking partners. Rigid body sampling is performed with ambiguous and symmetry restraints, generating 1000 models, from which the top 200 are selected. These models then undergo flexible refinement followed by MD refinement in explicit solvent, still maintaining the same ambiguous and symmetry restraints. Finally, docking models are clustered via RMSD, with all residues used to calculate RMSD values. The top 10 models from each cluster are selected. The `caprieval` module is added after each step to simplify model analysis and track the rank of models throughout the docking process.
```

### Running Haddock3 locally

> In the first section of the configuration file you can see:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the first section of the configuration file you can see the definition of global parameters:
```

{% highlight toml %}
# compute mode
mode = "local"

> ncores=8

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ncores = 8
```

One of the ways to analyse the docking results is to examine file(s) `analysis/XX_caprieval_analysis/report.html`. Depending on the positionning of the given caprieval module, `report.html` will display information about the models at the different stages of the workflow. For example, `11_caprieval_analysis/report.html` contains statictis related of the clusters, while `02_caprieval_analysis/report.html` contains statictis related to the models generated during the rigid body sampling stage.
Caprieval, executed after clustering - in this case `11_caprieval` - enables a comprehensive evaluation of the docking results from a broad perspective. 

<a class="prompt prompt-info"> Open 'analysis/11_caprieval_analysis/report.html' in a web browser by typing "open report.html" in the command line. Once the report is displayed, locate the table with cluster statistics at the top of the page. You can sort the columns in ascending or descending order by clicking the arrow icon on the right side of each column header. 
</a>

> Here is a scheenshot of the top-left cornet of the table in `11_caprieval_analysis/report.htm`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a screenshot of the top-left cornet of the table in `11_caprieval_analysis/report.htm`:
```

<figure align="center">
<img src="/education/HADDOCK3/HADDOCK3-protein-dna-basic/stat_analys_table.png">
</figure>

You can also access this file [here](/education/HADDOCK3/HADDOCK3-protein-dna-basic/report.html). 

<a class="prompt prompt-question">
Look at the "HADDOCK score" row of the first 3 clusters: Are they significantly different if you consider the average scores, standard deviations and cluster size?
</a>
<details style="background-color:#DAE4E7">
 <summary style="bold">
   <i>Answer</i> <i class="material-icons">expand_more</i>
 </summary>
 <p>

>    According to the two-sample t-test, there is a significant difference between cluster_1 and cluster_2, as well as between cluster_1 and cluster_3. However, there is no significant difference between cluster_2 and cluster_3.

Reviewer: Usually, we simplify this analysis by considering that if mean-std of first is still above mean+std of the second, they are significantly different.
Here the two-sample t-test is probably the best solution, but not easy to perform.

Author: Still, let’s leave a proper test here. Don’t think it’s a good idea to give such an intuitive approximation in the written tutorial, only in oral one

 </p>
</details>
<br>
In this docking case, we had access to the experimentally solved structure of the complex, which we provided to all caprieval modules. As a result, the interface RMSD (i-RMSD), ligand RMSD (l-RMSD), Fraction of Common Contacts (FCC), and DockQ statistics reflect the quality of the docked model in comparison to the reference structure.

> Remember that higher DockQ and FCC values, along with lower RMSD values, indicate better model quality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember that high DockQ and FCC values, along with low RMSD values, indicate better model quality.
```

<a class="prompt prompt-question">
Look at the DockQ of the clusters: Does the top-ranked cluster has the highest average DockQ?
</a>
<details style="background-color:#DAE4E7">
 <summary style="bold">
   <i>Answer</i> <i class="material-icons">expand_more</i>
 </summary>
 <p>
Yes, cluster_1 has the highest average DockQ. However, cluster_3 has the same DockQ. 
 </p>
</details>
<br>

> _**Note**_ that if no reference structure is provided to the caprieval module, all statistics are calculated relative to the top-ranked docking model. However, keep in mind that the top-ranked model may not necessarily represent the true solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_**Note**_ that if no reference structure is provided to the caprieval module, all statistics are calculated relative to the top-ranked docking model, based on the Haddock-score. However, keep in mind that the top-ranked model may not necessarily represent the true solution.
```

### Visualisation of the HADDOCK scores and their components

> Below the cluster statistics table, you'll find a series of plots displaying the HADDOCK score and its components against various metrics (i-RMSD, l-RMSD, FCC, DockQ), with clusters represented using color coding. The last rows show plots of cluster statistics, i.e. distributions of values per cluster, ordered by their HADDOCK rank.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below the cluster statistics table, you can find a series of plots displaying the HADDOCK score and its components against various metrics (i-RMSD, l-RMSD, FCC, DockQ), with clusters represented using color coding. The last rows show plots of cluster statistics, *i.e.* distributions of values per cluster, ordered by their HADDOCK-score.
```

> These plots are interactive. A menu will appear at the top right, just above the last plot in the first row, when you hover your mouse over it. This menu allows you to zoom in and out of the plots and toggle the visibility of clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These plots are interactive. A menu will appear at the top right, just above the last plot in the first row, when you hover it with your mouse. This menu allows you to zoom in and out of the plots and toggle the display of clusters.
```

How close are these models to the reference? Did HADDOCK do a good job at ranking the docking models?
</a>
<details style="background-color:#DAE4E7">
 <summary style="bold">
   <i>Answer</i> <i class="material-icons">expand_more</i>
 </summary>
 <p>
The models are acceptably close to the reference. Although the best model may not be top-ranked one, HADDOCK produces a reasonable ranking.
 </p>
</details>
<br>
It may be helpful to examine several top-ranked models from each cluster. This can give you insight into the diversity of the models within a cluster, as well as the diversity of models across different clusters. 

<a class="prompt prompt-info"> Compare the top-ranked models within the same cluster. Are the top models from each cluster close to the reference structure?
</a>

<hr>

## Congratulations!

You've reached the end of this basic protein-DNA docking tutorial. We hope it has been informative and helps you get started with your own docking projects. Check out the advanced version of this tutorial ([currently awaliable only for Haddock2.4 server](https://www.bonvinlab.org/education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-DNA-advanced/)) for deeper insights into protein-DNA docking!

> Happy docking!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Happy HADDOCKing!
```

 <figure style="text-align: center;">
   <img width="50%" src="/education/HADDOCK3/HADDOCK3-protein-DNA-basic/CRO-interface.png">
 </figure>
 <br>
</details>
<br>
<a class="prompt prompt-question">
Can you tell why the residue 33 is excluded from the interface amino acids?
</a>
<details style="background-color:#DAE4E7">
 <summary style="bold">
   <i>Answer</i> <i class="material-icons">expand_more</i>
 </summary>
 <p>
   The residue 33 is not solvent accessible, thus it does not belong to the interface. You can visualise it by colouring residue 33 in blue, and switching between to the cartoon and surface representations (sele resi 33; color blue, sele; show cartoon; show surface)
 </p>
</details>
<br>
<a class="prompt prompt-info">
Repeat the same analysis with the DNA molecule OR1_unbound.pdb using the residues (13+14+15+16+17+18+22+23+24+25) or (4+5+6+7+31+32+33+34+35+36) as an interface.
</a>

_**Note**_ that in the real docking case the bound structure of a complex is unavailable. In this case, the interface residues could be located using experimental data, knowledge from the literature, using computational predictions, etc.

### What’s inside of the restraints file?

> The ambiguous interaction restraints are defined in the `ambig_prot_dna.tbl` file. This file was created using both experimental knowledge and information from literature. A detailed explanation of how to generate these restraints can be found in the advanced version of the tutorial, [here](https://www.bonvinlab.org/education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-DNA-advanced/#available-data). 

Reviewer 2: The old tutorial is using this `../tools/AIRviewer.py` which I don't think works on recent versions of pymol. Any chance you could explain the restraint generation here but using [haddock-restraints](https://github.com/haddocking/haddock-restraints)?

Reviewer: Yes, the `AIRviewer.py` is still functional

Author: In this tutorial restraints are just used, not generated. Restraints are generated in the advanced tutorial, it’s next on my list. 
That advanced tutorial should be a good place to introduce haddock-restraints indeed!

---
layout: page
title: "Basic protein-DNA docking using local version of Haddock3"
excerpt: "A basic tutorial on protein-DNA docking in Haddock3."
tags: [HADDOCK, Haddock3, PyMOL, Protein-DNA, symmetry, 3-body docking]
image:
 feature: pages/banner_education-thin.jpg
---
This tutorial consists of the following sections:

* table of contents
{:toc}

<hr>

## Introduction

> This tutorial demonstrates a simplified Haddock3 workflow dedicated to predicting the 3D structure of protein-DNA (double-stranded DNA) complexes using pre-defined restraints, derived from the literature, and symmetry restraints. Here, we introduce the basic concepts of HADDOCK, suitable for tackling various typical protein-DNA docking challenges: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial demonstrates how to setup a Haddock3 workflow dedicated at predicting the 3D structure of protein-DNA (double-stranded DNA) complexes using pre-defined restraints, derived from the literature, and symmetry restraints. Here, we introduce the basic concepts of HADDOCK, suitable for tackling various typical protein-DNA docking challenges: 
```

Author: This tutorial demonstrates how to setup a Haddock3 workflow dedicated to predict the 3D structure of protein-DNA (double-stranded DNA) complexes...

</a>

Decompressing the file will create the `haddock3-protein-dna-basic` directory with the following subdirectories and items: 
* `protein-dna-basic.cfg`, a Haddock3 configuration file;
* `pdbs`:
    * `1ZUG_ensemble.pdb`, an NMR ensemble (10 structures) of the 343 Cro repressor structures;
    * `1ZUG_dimer1.pdb`, a single structure coming from the NMR ensemble (`1ZUG_ensemble.pdb`) with the terminal disordered residues removed;
    * `1ZUG_dimer2.pdb`, a single structure coming from the NMR ensemble (`1ZUG_ensemble.pdb`) with the terminal disordered residues removed. Differ from `1ZUG_dimer1.pdb` only by chain ID;
    * `OR1_unbound.pdb`, a structure of the OR1 operator in B-DNA conformation;
    * `3CRO_complex.pdb`, an X-RAY structure of the sought-for complex, to be used to evaluate the docking poses.
* `restraints`:
    * `ambig_prot_dna.tbl`, a file containing the ambiguous restraints for this docking scenario.
* `saved-run`, a folder with Haddock3 output, produced by the `protein-dna-basic.cfg` workflow. We will navigate relevant parts of this folder throughout the tutorial.

<hr>

## Understanding the Ambiguous Interaction Restraints

> The Ambiguous Interaction Restraints (AIRs) are crucial to successful docking as AIRs should guide docking partners towards the correct conformation. AIRs consist of the residues located in the interface of a complex.

Reviewer: Proposed a reformulation.
Must not necessary be modified with this suggestion.
```suggestion
The Ambiguous Interaction Restraints (AIRs) are crucial to successful docking, as they are guiding the modeling process of the partners by sampling conformations satisfying the AIRs, hopefully towards the correct conformation.
AIRs are defined between residues/nucleotides located at the interface of a complex.
```

Author: The Ambiguous Interaction Restraints (AIRs) are crucial to successful docking, as they guide the modelling process by biasing partners' conformation and orientation towards a certain, hopefully correct conformation of the complex.

 </p>
</details>
<br>
<a class="prompt prompt-info">
Repeat the same analysis with the DNA molecule OR1_unbound.pdb using the residues (13+14+15+16+17+18+22+23+24+25) or (4+5+6+7+31+32+33+34+35+36) as an interface.
</a>

_**Note**_ that in the real docking case the bound structure of a complex is unavailable. In this case, the interface residues could be located using experimental data, knowledge from the literature, using computational predictions, etc.

### What’s inside of the restraints file?

The ambiguous interaction restraints are defined in the `ambig_prot_dna.tbl` file.
This file was created using both experimental knowledge and information from literature.
A detailed explanation of how to generate these restraints can be found in the advanced version of the tutorial, accessible [here](https://www.bonvinlab.org/education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-DNA-advanced/#available-data). 

Let’s have a look at it's first lines:
```bash
assign ( resid 35 and segid C)

> (
> ( resid 32 and segid B and (name H3 or name O4 or name C4 or name C5 or name C6 or name C7))
> or
> ( resid 33 and segid B and (name H3 or name O4 or name C4 or name C5 or name C6 or name C7))
> ) 2.000 2.000 0.000

Reviewer: Add a little indentation to better emphasis that they are together
```suggestion
(
   (  resid 32 and segid B and (name H3 or name O4 or name C4 or name C5 or name C6 or name C7))
    or
    ( resid 33 and segid B and (name H3 or name O4 or name C4 or name C5 or name C6 or name C7))
) 2.000 2.000 0.000
```

```
The first line means that the residue 35 from the chain C (protein) should interact either with the residue 32, or with the residue 33 of the chain B (DNA). Additionally, the substring `(name H3 or name O4 or name C4 or name C5 or name C6 or name C7)` precise the atoms with which the interaction should occur.

> In other words, if at least one pair or residues (residue 35 from chain C; residue 32 from chain B) or (residue 35 from chain C; residue 33 from chain B) are located within 2Å from one another - then this particular restraint is satisfied.

Reviewer: This is not really true.
As it is the pseudo-distance that must be found under 2A.
Hard to have a simple way of saying it.
Basically you will hopefully NEVER observe an inter-molecular contact under 2A.

Author: “To simplifiy, if at least one pair or residues (residue 35 from chain C; residue 32 from chain B) or (residue 35 from chain C; residue 33 from chain B) are located in the vicinity from one another - then this particular restraint is satisfied.”

Vagues, but it’s an idea? I have to read about an actual mechanism tho

Since the core conformation remains unchanged, we can simply take the first conformation from the ensemble, remove the disordered tail from it and use it as an input structure for the docking. 

This can be done using `pdb-tools`, a collection of simple scripts handy to manipulate pdb files. `pdb-tools` is installed automatically with Haddock3. Alternatively, it is also available as a [web-server](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/pdbtools/).

To obtain a single trimmed structure, we will make use of the command-line version of `pdb-tools`. 
Please, _**remember to activate a virtual environment for Haddock3**_ before using  `pdb-tools`. 
The following command will override the existing file with the name `1ZUG_dimer1.pdb` - consider executing it outside of `pdbs/`:
<a class="prompt prompt-cmd">
pdb_fetch 1ZUG | pdb_selmodel -1 | pdb_delhetatm | pdb_selres -1:66 | pdb_tidy -strict > 1ZUG_dimer1.pdb
</a>

This sequence of commands: 1/ Downloads given structure in PDB format from the RCSB website; 2/ Extracts the first model from the file; 3/ Removes all HETATM records in the PDB file; 4/ Selects residues by their index (in a range); 5/ Adds TER statement at the end of the chain.

> The complex of interest contains 2 copies of the protein. As each molecule given to HADDOCK in a docking scenario must have a **unique chain ID and segment ID**, we have to change chain ID from A to C and save this as a new structure (segment ID remains empty for both cases, which is acceptable):

Reviewer: I was confused with the `pdb_rplchain`, so I added a hint.
```suggestion
The complex of interest contains 2 copies of the protein. As each molecule given to HADDOCK in a docking scenario must have a **unique chain ID and segment ID**, we have to change chain ID from A to C (using the `pdb_rplchain` command, standing for pdb replace chain) and save this as a new structure (segment ID remains empty for both cases, which is acceptable):
```

Author: The complex of interest contains 2 copies of the protein. As each molecule given to HADDOCK in a docking scenario must have a **unique chain ID and segment ID**, we have to change the chain ID from A to C and save this as a new structure. This can be achieved using another command from `pdb_tools`, namely, `pdb_rplchain`, which stands for "replace chain":

<a class="prompt prompt-cmd">
pdb_rplchain -A:C 1ZUG_dimer1.pdb > 1ZUG_dimer2.pdb
</a>

_**Note**_ that it is possible to perform the docking with an ensemble of trimmed conformations. Such ensemble can be obtained using the following command: `pdb_fetch 1ZUG | pdb_delhetatm | pdb_selres -1:66 | pdb_tidy -strict > 1zug_ens.pdb`. Here the command `pdb_selmodel -1` was removed and therefore all the available models in the ensemble will be processed.

<hr>

## Docking with Haddock3

> In this section, we will discuss the specifics of protein-DNA docking in the frame of Haddock3. We will then create an appropriate Haddock3 workflow and, finally, perform an analysis of the docking results and evaluate their quality with respect to the experimentally solved structure as a reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we will discuss the specificities related to protein-DNA docking in the frame of Haddock3. We will then create an appropriate Haddock3 workflow and, finally, perform an analysis of the docking results and evaluate their quality with respect to the experimentally solved structure as a reference.
```

temp_cool3_init = 300

[caprieval]
reference_fname = "pdbs/3CRO_complex.pdb"

[mdref]
tolerance = 5
# to maintain conformation of the DNA with automatic restraints
dnarest_on = true
# Cro to OR1 ambiguous restraints
ambig_fname = "restraints/ambig_prot_DNA.tbl"
# C2 symmetry
sym_on = true
c2sym_seg1_1 = 'A'
c2sym_seg2_1 = 'C'
c2sym_sta1_1 = 4
c2sym_sta2_1 = 4
c2sym_end1_1 = 64
c2sym_end2_1 = 64
# constant for the electrostatic energy term (default value)
epsilon = 1
w_desolv = 0
# reduce the number of MD steps 
watersteps = 750

[caprieval]
reference_fname = "pdbs/3CRO_complex.pdb"

[rmsdmatrix]
# by default, all residues of each docking partner are used to calculate the RMSD matrix

[clustrmsd]
# generate an interactive plot of the clustering results
plot_matrix = true

[seletopclusts]

[caprieval]
reference_fname = "pdbs/3CRO_complex.pdb"

# ====================================================================

{% endhighlight %}

_**Note**_ that in this example we use relative paths to define input files and output folder. However it is preferable to use the full paths instead. 

> This workflow begins by creating topologies for the docking partners. Rigid body sampling is performed with ambiguous and symmetry restraints, generating 1000 models, from which the top 200 are selected. These models then undergo flexible refinement followed by MD refinement in explicit solvent, still maintaining the same ambiguous and symmetry restraints. Finally, docking models are clustered via RMSD, with all residues used to calculate RMSD values. The top 10 models from each cluster are selected. The `caprieval` module is added after each step to simplify model analysis and track the rank of models throughout the docking process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This workflow begins by creating topologies for the docking partners (`[topoaa]`). Rigid body sampling (`[rigidbody]`) is performed with ambiguous and symmetry restraints, generating 1000 models, from which the top 200 are selected (`[seletop]`). These models then undergo flexible refinement (`[flexref]`) followed by MD refinement in explicit solvent (`[mdref]`), still maintaining the same ambiguous and symmetry restraints. Finally, root-mean-squared distance (RMSD) matrix between docking models is computed (`[rmsdmatrix]`), with backbone atomes of all residues used to calculate RMSD,  and clustered (`[clustrmsd]`). The top 10 models from each cluster are selected (`[seletopclusts]`). The `caprieval` module is added after each step using the crystal structure as reference to simplify the analysis and track the rank of models throughout the docking process.
```

Author: RMSD have been defined before (in ### Haddock3 workflow) , the rest I am adding to the manual commit

Author: This workflow begins by creating topologies for the docking partners (`[topoaa]`). Rigid body sampling (`[rigidbody]`) is performed with ambiguous and symmetry restraints, generating 1000 models, from which the top 200 are selected (`[seletop]`). These models then undergo flexible refinement (`[flexref]`) followed by MD refinement in explicit solvent (`[mdref]`), still maintaining the same ambiguous and symmetry restraints. Finally, the RMSD matrix for docking models is computed (`[rmsdmatrix]`), followed by its clusterisation (`[clustrmsd]`). The RMSD values are calculated using the backbone atoms of all residues of each docking partner. The top 10 models from each cluster are selected (`[seletopclusts]`). The `caprieval` module is added after each step using the crystal structure as a reference to simplify the analysis and track the rank of models throughout the docking process.

### Running Haddock3 locally

In the first section of the configuration file you can see the definition of the global parameters:

{% highlight toml %}
# compute mode
mode = "local"
ncores = 8
{% endhighlight %}

> The parameter `mode` defines how this workflow will be executed. In this case, it will run locally, on your machine, using 8 CPUs (feel free to change this value). You can find out about other modes [here](https://www.bonvinlab.org/education/HADDOCK3/HADDOCK3-antibody-antigen-bioexcel2023/#local-execution).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parameter `mode` defines how this workflow will be executed. In this case, it will run locally, on your machine, using up to 8 CPUs (feel free to change this value if you have access to more). You can find out about other modes [here](https://www.bonvinlab.org/education/HADDOCK3/HADDOCK3-antibody-antigen-bioexcel2023/#local-execution).
```

Author: Feel free to change this value, if more cores are available.

Each sampling, refinement, or selection module's directory contains compressed PDB files of the docking models. For example, `10_seletopclusts` contains the top-ranked docking models from each of the 9 clusters. Clusters are numbered based on the average rank of the models within them, so cluster_1 contains the top-ranked models of the entire run. Information about the origin of each model can be found in `10_seletopclusts/seletopclusts.txt`, as well as in `traceback/traceback.tsv`.

One of the ways to analyse the docking results is to examine file(s) `analysis/XX_caprieval_analysis/report.html`. Depending on the positionning of the given caprieval module, `report.html` will display information about the models at the different stages of the workflow. For example, `11_caprieval_analysis/report.html` contains statictis related of the clusters, while `02_caprieval_analysis/report.html` contains statictis related to the models generated during the rigid body sampling stage.
Caprieval, executed after clustering - in this case `11_caprieval` - enables a comprehensive evaluation of the docking results from a broad perspective. 

> <a class="prompt prompt-info"> Open 'analysis/11_caprieval_analysis/report.html' in a web browser by typing "open report.html" in the command line. Once the report is displayed, locate the table with cluster statistics at the top of the page. You can sort the columns in ascending or descending order by clicking the arrow icon on the right side of each column header. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<a class="prompt prompt-info"> Open 'analysis/11_caprieval_analysis/report.html' in a web browser by typing "open report.html" in the command line. Once the report is displayed, locate the table with cluster statistics at the top of the page. You can sort the columns in ascending or descending order by clicking the arrow icon (&#8646;) on the right side of each column header. 
```

Remember that high DockQ and FCC values, along with low RMSD values, indicate better model quality.

<a class="prompt prompt-question">
Look at the DockQ of the clusters: Does the top-ranked cluster have the highest average DockQ?
</a>
<details style="background-color:#DAE4E7">
 <summary style="bold">
   <i>Answer</i> <i class="material-icons">expand_more</i>
 </summary>
 <p>
Yes, cluster_1 has the highest average DockQ. However, cluster_3 has the same DockQ. 
 </p>
</details>
<br>
_**Note**_ that if no reference structure is provided to the caprieval module, all statistics are calculated relative to the top-ranked (based on HADDOCK score) docking model. However, keep in mind that the top-ranked model may not necessarily represent the true solution.

### Visualisation of the HADDOCK scores and their components

> Below the cluster statistics table, you'll find a series of plots displaying the HADDOCK score and its components against various metrics (i-RMSD, l-RMSD, FCC, DockQ), with clusters represented using color coding. The last rows show plots of cluster statistics, i.e. distributions of values per cluster, ordered by their HADDOCK rank.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below the cluster statistics table, you'll find a series of plots displaying the HADDOCK score and its components against various metrics (i-RMSD, l-RMSD, FCC, DockQ), with clusters represented using color coding. The last rows show plots of cluster statistics, i.e. distributions of values per cluster, ordered by their HADDOCK score.
```

These plots are interactive. A menu will appear at the top right, just above the last plot in the first row, when you hover your mouse over it. This menu allows you to zoom in and out of the plots and toggle the visibility of clusters.

<figure align="center">
<img src="/education/HADDOCK3/HADDOCK3-protein-dna-basic/stat_plots.png">
</figure>

<a class="prompt prompt-info"> Inspect the plots. Which of the score components correlates best with the quality of the models?
</a>

> Depending on the docking models, there could be a set of unclustered models. It will be explisitely shown in `report.html` as 'other'. You can see the origins of these models in `traceback/traceback.tsv`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the docking models, there could be a set of unclustered models. It will be explicitly shown in `report.html` as 'other'. You can see the origins of these models in `traceback/traceback.tsv`. 
```

### Visualisation of the docking models

> It's time to visualise some of the docking models. Let's take a look at `cluster_1_model_1.pdb`, the best-ranked model; `cluster_3_model_3.pdb`, the model with the lowest i-RMSD (as shown in the plot "HADDOCK score vs i-RMSD"); and the reference structure `3CRO_complex.pdb`. Please open all these files in PyMOL (it can display compressed PDB files). You can find the first two files in `10_seletopclusts`, and the reference structure in `pdbs`. Then, in the PyMOL command line, type:

Reviewer: Here, models are compressed (`clean = true`), which will make the models `.pdb.gz` files.
The user must first un-compress them, using for example the following command: `haddock3-unpack <directory>`.

Author: No need as Pymol displays compressed models just fine.
I'll add this as a note

Reviewer: Ow I did not know !
